---
layout: post
title: Setting up virtual Ruby environments with RVM
category: programming
external_links:
    - title: RVM documentation
      link: https://rvm.io
      description: Official site and full documentation for RVM
    - title: virtualenv post
      link: /programming/2016/03/24/virtualenv.html
      description: See here for a post on virtualenv, Python's equivalent of RVM
---

When I was first building this website, I needed to set up Jekyll so I could build a development instance of this site. For this, I had to set up a Ruby development environment. If you've seen my post on using [virtualenv](/programming/2016/03/24/virtualenv.html), you might be getting a bit of déjà vu. Fortunately, as with Python, there is a proper way of setting up isolated Ruby instances, namely RVM.

RVM works a bit differently from virtualenv. Instead of a module for setting up environments in a given file path, RVM is a single program that lives in your home - `~/.rvm`. All Ruby environments created will go here, and you then set RVM to use one. In the end, however, it does the same job and solves the same problems.

### Installation
RVM is installed via a [script](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rvm/rvm/master/binscripts/rvm-installer) found in the RVM GitHub project (you can also use [get.rvm.io](get.rvm.io), which is a redirect). Simply download this script and run it:

{% highlight bash %}
    mwhamgenomics$ curl -o rvm_installer.sh https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rvm/rvm/master/binscripts/rvm-installer
    mwhamgenomics$ sh rvm_installer.sh stable  # or specify 'master' to install the latest development version of RVM
{% endhighlight %}

At this point, your `.bash_profile` shell config is modified to include the RVM executable and some helper functions. To get these, either reload your session or source the relevant files:

{% highlight bash %}
    mwhamgenomics$ source ~/.profile
    mwhamgenomics$ source ~/.rvm/scripts/rvm
{% endhighlight %}

Now RVM is ready to use. Calling with with no arguments prints usage information, including what actions are available:
- use - set RVM to use an installed Ruby environment
- install - install a version of Ruby
- uninstall - uninstall a version of Ruby
- list known - search for available Ruby versions

Installation of a new Ruby version would go something like:
{% highlight bash %}
    mwhamgenomics$ rvm list
    (shows installed Ruby versions)
    mwhamgenomics$ rvm list known
    (searches for available Ruby versions)
    mwhamgenomics$ rvm install 2.3.0
    mwhamgenomics$ which ruby
    /home/mwhamgenomics/.rvm/rubies/ruby-2.3.0/bin/ruby
    mwhamgenomics$ which gem
    /home/mwhamgenomics/.rvm/rubies/ruby-2.3.0/bin/gem
{% endhighlight %}

(Note: RVM on OSX requires Homebrew. When using RVM for the first time, you may be asked to install it. Fortunately, you can specify a non-root location for it - just make sure it's accessible to your shell session!)


### Gemsets
All RVM has done up to this point is manage Ruby versions. What about managing all your Ruby Gems per project? RVM does this via gemsets.

{% highlight bash %}
    mwhamgenomics$ rvm gemset list
    (lists all gemsets for the current Ruby environment)
    mwhamgenomics$ rvm gemset create <gemset_name>
    mwhamgenomics$ rvm gemset use <gemset_name>
{% endhighlight %}

This way, you can keep your Gems tied to a project as virtualenv does.
