---
layout: post
title: Building a web app - Introduction
category: programming
tags: ['python', 'reporting_app']
external_links:
    - title: Full Stack Python
      link: 'http://www.fullstackpython.com'
      description: A very useful website for all aspects of Python web development.
---

Over the past few months at work, I have had my first foray into web development. Due to the huge amount of data we're dealing with, we needed a way of viewing all the data we were generating in a better way than pasting tsv content into the local wiki, as we were doing previously. Static sites like blogs and wikis are all very well, but reporting on all of the hundreds of samples passing through our pipelines would require a fully dynamic database-powered website.

### Architecture
First, we had to consider the overall architecture of this new Reporting App. Our upstream pipelines would push data to a database, which would then be queried by a front end and displayed. We could have gone with this simple two-piece architecture, but we decided to add a third layer: a Rest API on top of the database. Apart from being something of a fad nowadays, a Rest API gives you a useful layer of control on top of the database, as well as a convenient web-based interface for pushing and pulling content.

Next, we had to decide what each of these layers should be implemented in. We decided to use a Python web framework for the front end, since we're mainly Python programmers. We could have gone with Django, but in the end we decided on Flask as a simpler, more lightweight alternative.

For the database, we decided to use MongoDB (a NoSQL database with powerful aggregation features) and, searching for a Python-based NoSQL Rest interface, we decided on Eve (which, by coincidence, is built on top of Flask). We could have gone with a SQL database (and we might move to one later) but NoSQL turned out to be a good choice for us because we knew we would be collecting more and more types of data as time went on, and NoSQL, storing JSON rather than tables, is essentially schema-less. That's not to say, however, that we had no schema at all: Eve was able to add a layer of data validation for content entering the database. This way, we could have an extremely extensible schema to which we could add new fields and endpoints without having to migrate the whole thing over to a new schema each time we updated.

Finally, we had to run the thing somewhere. Initially for development, we could use Flask's own internal Werkzeug server. To run a shared instance of the app for access by many people, however, we needed something a bit more elaborate. With a short script, we were able to run the app on Tornado, a Python-based web server (can you see a theme developing?) like Werkzeug, but a bit more production-ready.

As for hosting, we already had an unused Linux VM on our network, so we decided to open a couple of ports internally and set it up as a web server with a few Bash scripts for configuring, starting, stopping and restarting the app. There were probably better, more reliable ways of doing this, but I usually find that rolling your own solutions to problems both teaches you a lot and helps you understand how everything works if/when you move to third-party solutions. This was exactly what happened when we decided to switch web servers from Tornado to Apache - once the initial Apache head scratching was out of the way, prior knowledge of the interplay between Python and the webserver via WSGI was hugely helpful.

### The series
This is/will be a multi-part series on how the Edinburgh Genomics Reporting App was built. It's by no means a perfect example of web programming, but it's continuing to get better as we develop it, and I have learned a lot from the process.

- Part 1: [Building a Rest-powered database with NoSQL and Eve](/programming/2016/07/15/nosql_and_eve.html)
- Part 2: [Building a Flask website](/programming/2016/07/15/flask.html)
- Part 3: [Production environment on Tornado](/programming/2016/07/19/flask_on_tornado.html)
- Part 4: Production environment on Apache with mod_wsgi
